The African National Congress (ANC) welcomed and noted the Nedlac Advisory Panel’s report on the National Minimum Wage, which was released by the Deputy President Comrade Cyril Ramaphosa early this week. the National Economic Development and Labour Council (Nedlac) is the vehicle by which government, labour, business and community organisations will seek to cooperate on economic, labour and development issues, and related challenges facing the country. The National Minimum Wage aimed at reducing inequality and poverty among the working poor was proposed to be R3 500, which translates to R20 per hour. “The release of the proposed National Minimum Wage of R 3 500 marks a milestone in transforming the apartheid poverty wage. Now the process will begin whereby all our people will have an opportunity to engage the proposals to arrive at the agreed amount deemed as contributing to cover basic needs of those who are at the bottom of the wage ladder,” said Cde Zizi Kodwa, ANC National spokesperson. Cde Kodwa urged the social partners to proceed with urgency in finalizing the National Minimum Wage to ensure finality and certainty on the matter. In welcoming the report on the proposed National Minimum Wage, Cde Ramaphosa recalled that the imperative of a minimum living wage was not a new phenomenon to the ANC. “In advancing the towards crafting the minimum wage for our country, our starting point was that this concept of a national minimum wage was first conceptualized by the Congress of the People in Kliptown when the Freedom Charter was adopted.  The call for a national minimum wage was unambiguous when it declared – there shall be a 40-hour working week, a national minimum wage, paid annual leave and sick leave for all workers and maternity leave on full pay for all mothers,” said the Deputy President. He said 60 years later the concept that started as a dream by the people was now being realized in the form of the ANC led government putting the matter fully and firmly on the national agenda. After the adoption of the concept of a national minimum wage by the people, a vast amount of work has gone into ensuring the matter was developed and implemented. Cosatu led from the front to have a national minimum wage adopted. The ANC passed a resolution to this effect and included it as part of the commitments to the people in the 2014 General Elections Manifesto. In June 2014, President Jacob Zuma, during first State of the Nation address of the fifth democratic administration, announced the commencement of the process to investigate the national minimum wage as one of the key mechanisms to reduce income inequality. Cde Ramaphosa also emphasized the amount of international research by expertise employed in the Nedlac Advisory Panel that assisted the team to arrive at the proposed National Minimum Wage. While the Deputy President hailed the R3 500, which means R20 an hour for low earning workers proposal, he noted that it was by far not a living wage. Even though R3 500 or R20 per hour will not give our people a decent life, the proposed National Minimum Wage, he said, will be used as an instrument and one of the interventions to address inequality to about 6 to 7 million of our people who are trapped in poverty while they are employed. “We found that up to 47% of the people in South Africa suffer from income poverty.  Even though they are working, their level of income is so low that they remain trapped in the cycle of poverty.” Cde Ramaphosa said as the Committee of Principals, they have agreed that there’s a need to give an opportunity to all social partners in Nedlac to go and engage with the report, discuss with their constituent members and having discussed it, take a decision whether the recommendations are accepted, rejected or whether a portion of these are accepted and a portion rejected. “This is still an open process but the good thing is that recommendations have been put on the table by a panel of advisors which we have appointed.”