For the second time in consecutive years, the Department of Home Affairs has won the prestigious ICT Service Delivery Transformation Award in the National Government category at the ICT Public Service Awards at GovTech 2016, which was held in Midrand recently. This year, Home Affairs was nominated for the new automated booking system for Refugee Reception Offices, which is a project of the department’s Modernisation Programme. In October last year, the department received this award for the Smart ID Card project, another component of the Modernisation Programme which began in the 2012/13 financial year. The main aim of the department’s Modernisation Programme is to overhaul the department’s core business applications, technology infrastructure and overall operations for improved service delivery. Home Affairs Minister Comrade Malusi Gigaba welcomed the acknowledgement of progressive work in the department, which has been recognized through the two awards and by the public that are recipients of improved service delivery. The Minister also explained what the awards mean for the department and the nation. “Receiving these special awards two years in a row bears testimony to the success and progress of modernization. It goes precisely to show determination on our part to develop new technologies that are intended greatly to improve the way we deliver services to the people, said Cde Gigaba. In a nutshell, the ICT Service Delivery and Transformation Awards recognise the most outstanding service delivery initiative, product or service, and/or transformation in government. Entry requirements include a clear demonstration of benefit to citizens, demonstration of improvement to government processes or business, sustainability of the service delivery solution, impact of the transformation on the lives of citizens and description detailing how the solution has proved to be accessible, usable and successfully been deployed for use by citizens. The launch of the Smart ID Card, in 2013, had posed a huge challenge for the department, which meant rolling out the new high-tech Smart ID Cards to about 35 million citizens, in five years. However, great strides in that respect have been made. “We can boldly say that the number of Smart ID Cards issued to citizens has increased from 1 638 387 in the 2014/15 financial year to 2 320 973 in 2015/16, he said. Minister Gigaba also said the percentage of improved passports that have been issued within 13 working days has increased, from 86.7% in 2014/15 to 92.4% in 2015/16. He continued to say that innovative partnerships to fast-track applications and issuing of Smart ID Cards, as well as passports have been explored. “A total of 178 offices have been automated for Smart ID Cards and passports, while 140 offices now have point-of-sale devices for card payments.” The Home Affairs Service points, according to Cde Gigaba, have also been established to facilitate online applications at 10 branches of the four largest banks in South Africa; Absa, FNB, Nedbank and Standard Bank. Related to these service improvement initiatives has also been the implementation of the biometric capturing system at four international airports, namely; OR Tambo, Cape Town, Lanseria and King Shaka. “With the Modernisation Programme, it means, from April this year, the department is now running a multi-channel Home Affairs Contact Centre, based at Head-Office, in Pretoria, to improve communication and service delivery,” Cde Gigaba added. He said innovations such as the award-winning Smart ID Card and the automated booking system for refugee reception centres is yet another demonstration of the resolve to provide a service for the future, best to meet aspirations of citizens and clients. The vehicle in this regard is the Home Affairs Modernisation Programme that should advance the building of a modern, digital, professional and patriotic department. “A modernized department of this form, in nature paperless and digitized, will indeed serve as an enabler for e-government in the Republic of South Africa. It is in line with the national priority to give our people a capable state they deserve to bury the legacy of apartheid-colonialism and its discourses of race and unequal distribution of the wealth of the country.” The absence of restless clients, standing in long lines at the department’s offices serves as proof that eHome Affairs has indeed improved service delivery to the public while winning two awards in consecutive years is a cherry on top.