This week the African National Congress (ANC), which is the oldest liberation movement in Africa and has been South Africa’s majority governing political party for the past twenty-two years, strengthened its ties with the Communist Party of China. This follows a visit by Comrade Li Yuanchao, the Vice President of the People’s Republic of China and member of the Politburo the CPC who met with the Secretary General of the ANC, Comrade Gwede Mantashe in Cape Town. In welcoming Comrade Yanchao, the ANC’s Secretary General stated that the event was on a party-to-party basis. “This meeting is between the ANC and CPC, the purpose of which is to strengthen our relationship that already exists and extend our bilateral relations,” he said. Cde Mantashe further said the two parties’ relationship that is mutually beneficial and is based on mutual respect, should last for many years to come. “As equal partners in this relationship, we are going to renew our Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) for another five years and continue to learn from one another,” the ANC’s secretary general added. Since the China is an economic giant, through CPC’s policies and its governance system, Cde Mantashe said the ANC, which still governs a young democracy had a lot to learn from its Chinese partners. “We are learning a lot from the CPC but it is not happening fast enough for us in the ANC because our main aim is to reduce the inequality and tackle poverty in South Africa, that task requires sound political discipline together with proper governance structures.” Addressing the media briefly before the meeting of the two parties, Cde Li Yuanchao concurred with Cde Mantashe that the CPC was looking forward to renewing its MOU with the ANC for the next five years. He also added that the two countries, China and South Africa and the CPC and the ANC enjoyed a very good cooperation. The MOU on Exchange and Cooperation between the ANC and the Communist Party of China was signed in 2008.  Early last year, Cde Mantashe led a delegation to China to develop a programme of exchanges between the two parties for the year.  Following the first signing of the MOU, the ANC has sent its leaders on Study Tours to China.  The ANC delegation sent to China to learn about their governance system has included ANC leaders both at NEC and at Provincial levels; a significant number of whom are ANC deployees at Ministerial and MEC levels. The CPC has remained welcoming to receive such a high-level ANC delegation and sees it as a sign of how greatly the ANC values the relationship between the two parties. With the MOU being extended for the next five years, Cde Mantashe believed that the ANC will continue to derive a lot of value from the interactions. “Learning is not about quoting a number of paragraphs from what you’ve learned it is about structured thinking and application of the skills you have gained. The ANC intends to use the experiences of the early stages of the CPC in government in order to confront key challenges facing the movement being corruption, factionalism and accidental succession,” concluded Cde Mantashe.